


NETWORK WORKING GROUP                                          J. Altman
Internet-Draft                                          Secure Endpoints
Expires: June 16, 2007                                       N. Williams
                                                        Sun Microsystems
                                                       December 13, 2006


           On the Use of Channel Bindings to Secure Channels
                  draft-altman-tls-channel-bindings-01

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 16, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2006).













Altman & Williams         Expires June 16, 2007                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             On Channel Bindings             December 2006


Abstract

   This document defines a form of channel bindings for TLS (Transport
   Layer Security), namely the concatenation of the initial client and
   server "finished" messages for a TLS connection.


Table of Contents

   1.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Naming TLS Connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Recommended Application Programming Interfaces . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 10


































Altman & Williams         Expires June 16, 2007                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             On Channel Bindings             December 2006


1.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Altman & Williams         Expires June 16, 2007                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             On Channel Bindings             December 2006


2.  Naming TLS Connections

   Whenever a "name" is needed for a TLS connection such that the "name"
   is cryptographically bound to the said TLS [RFC4346]connection (its
   pre-master secret, negotiation, messages, etc...) such a name may be
   constructed as described below; we term this a "channel binding."

   The channel bindings for TLS connections consist of the concatenation
   of the initial client and server "finished" TLS messages section
   7.4.9 [RFC4346] (note: the unencrypted messages).  The initial TLS
   finished messages are the first pair of TLS finished messages
   exchanged after TLS channel establishment.  It is irrelevant whether
   the TLS channel was established with a previous SessionID section
   7.4.1.2 [RFC4346] or not.

   Application protocols MAY specify which of the two initial finished
   messages, or combination of both of them, to use.  If this is not
   specified, the concatenation of the client and the server finished
   TLS messages are used. (client finished message first.)

   The process by which applications perform "channel binding," that is,
   the process by which applications establish that the channel bindings
   for a given TLS connection are observed to be the same at both
   application ends of the TLS connection is not described here.



























Altman & Williams         Expires June 16, 2007                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             On Channel Bindings             December 2006


3.  Recommended Application Programming Interfaces

   TLS implementations supporting the use of initial TLS finished
   messages as channel bindings should provide application programming
   interfaces to enable higher level protocol implementations to obtain
   the initial TLS finished messages for both the client and server
   endpoints.

   It is acceptable for the API to provide access to the most recent
   finished messages although doing so will require that the application
   be aware of TLS renegotiations in order to ensure that the correct
   set of TLS finished messages are used.







































Altman & Williams         Expires June 16, 2007                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             On Channel Bindings             December 2006


4.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations for this document.
















































Altman & Williams         Expires June 16, 2007                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             On Channel Bindings             December 2006


5.  Security Considerations

   The TLS finished messages section7.4.9 [RFC4346] are known to both
   TLS endpoints and can therefore be safely used as a channel binding
   provided that the higher level protocol binding to the TLS channel
   provides integrity protection for the TLS finished messages and only
   communicates the TLS finished messages across the TLS channel that it
   is binding to.

   If there is an active man-in-the-middle attack, the attacker will
   already possess knowledge of the TLS finished messages for both
   inbound and outbound TLS channels.  Therefore, there is no additional
   information obtained by the attacker via the use of the TLS finished
   messages as a channel binding

   The Security Considerations section of
   "draft-williams-on-channel-binding" applies to this document.


































Altman & Williams         Expires June 16, 2007                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             On Channel Bindings             December 2006


6.  Normative References

   [I-D.williams-on-channel-binding]
              Williams, N., "On the Use of Channel Bindings to Secure
              Channels", draft-williams-on-channel-binding-00 (work in
              progress), August 2006.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4346]  Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security
              (TLS) Protocol Version 1.1", RFC 4346, April 2006.







































Altman & Williams         Expires June 16, 2007                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             On Channel Bindings             December 2006


Authors' Addresses

   Jeffrey Altman
   Secure Endpoints Inc.
   255 W 94TH ST PHB
   NEW YORK, NY  10025
   US

   Email: jaltman@secure-endpoints.com


   Nicolas Williams
   Sun Microsystems Inc.
   5300 Riata Trace Ct
   Austin, TX  78727
   US

   Email: Nicolas.Williams@sun.com

































Altman & Williams         Expires June 16, 2007                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             On Channel Bindings             December 2006


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2006).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA).





Altman & Williams         Expires June 16, 2007                [Page 10]


