SASL Working Group                                           A. Melnikov
Internet Draft                             ACI WorldWide/MessagingDirect
Document: draft-melnikov-sasl-digest-aes-00.txt            February 2002


              AES Ciphersuites for DIGEST-MD5 SASL mechanism

Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC 2026.

   Internet Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its Areas, and its Working Groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet
   Drafts. Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of
   six months.  Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted
   by other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use
   Internet Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
   ``work in progress''.

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

     Directories on ds.internic.net, nic.nordu.net, ftp.isi.edu, or
     munnari.oz.au.

   A revised version of this draft document will be submitted to the RFC
   editor as a Proposed Standard for the Internet Community.  Discussion
   and suggestions for improvement are requested.  Distribution of this
   draft is unlimited.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

Abstract

   This document describes the use of the AES Cipher Algorithm in Cipher
   Block Chaining Mode, as a confidentiality algorithm for DIGEST-MD5
   SASL mechanism.


Table of Contents

   <TBD>


1  Introduction

    At present, the symmetric ciphers supported by DIGEST-MD5 are RC4,
    DES and triple DES. The SASL mechanism would be enhanced by the
    addition of AES [AES] ciphersuites, for the following reasons:

     1.  RC4 is a subject to intellectual property claims. RSA Security
         Inc has claims that the RC4 algorithm is a trade secret.

     2.  DES is not considered secure.

     3.  The AES is computationally and memory efficient and has withstood
         extensive cryptanalytic analysis. It is easy implementable on
         a variety of software and hardware, including smart cards
         and handheld computers. The AES is therefore a desirable choice.

     This document proposes a new DIGEST-MD5 ciphersuite, with the aim of
     overcoming these problems.


2  Conventions and Notation

   This document uses conventions established by [DIGEST].


3 Definition of AES ciphers for Confidentiality Protection

   This document extends the ABNF definition of cipher-value defined in
   section 2.1.1 of [DIGEST].

        cipher-value      |= "aes"

   where

      aes
         the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) cipher [AES] in cipher
         block chaining (CBC) mode with a 128 bit key. This mode requires an
         Initialization Vector (IV) that is the same size as the block size.

   Section 2.4 of [DIGEST] defines the value of "n" that is used to construct
   Kcc and Kcs. For cipher "aes" n is 16. The key for the "aes" cipher is all
   16 bytes of Kcc or Kcs.

   The IV for the "aes" cipher in CBC mode for messages going from client
   to server (IVc) consists of 16 bytes calculated as follows:

   IVc = MD5({Kcc, "aes-128"})

   The IV for the "aes" cipher in CBC mode for messages going from server
   to client (IVs) consists of 16 bytes calculated as follows:

   IVs = MD5({Kcs, "aes-128"})

   The IV is XOR'd with the first plaintext block before it is encrypted.
   Then for successive blocks, the previous ciphertext block is XOR'd with
   the current plaintext, before it is encrypted.


4  Security Considerations

   It is not believed that the new ciphersuite is ever less secure
   than the corresponding older ones.  The AES is believed to be
   secure, and it has withstood extensive cryptanalytic attack.

   The use of MD5 hash in DIGEST-MD5 limits the length of AES key to
   128 bit, because a key is the output of MD5 hash (i.e. it can't be
   longer than 128 bit).


5   References

   [RFC 2222] Myers, J., "Simple Authentication and Security Layer
              (SASL)", RFC 2222, October 1997.

   [DIGEST]   Leach, P., Newman, C., "Using Digest Authentication as a 
              SASL Mechanism", RFC 2831, May 2000.

   [AES]      Daemen, J., Rijmen, V., "The Rijndael Block Cipher",
              http://csrc.nist.gov/encryption/aes/rijndael/Rijndael.pdf,
              3rd September 1999.

   [RFC 1321] Rivest, R., "The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm", RFC 1321,
              April 1992.


6  Acknowledgements

    This document borrows some text from draft-ietf-ipsec-ciph-aes-cbc-03.txt
    and draft-ietf-tls-ciphersuite-06.txt.


7  Authors' Addresses

    Alexey Melnikov
    mailto: mel@messagingdirect.com

    ACI WorldWide/MessagingDirect
    900 10117 - Jasper Ave.
    Edmonton, Alberta, T5J 1W8, CANADA


8  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2002).  All Rights Reserved.

   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
   included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.
